---
layout: post
title:  "Control : Are we really free? "
author: Viraj
categories: [ philosophy, ideas ]
image: https://github.com/high-in-entropy/parity/blob/master/assets/images/consumerism_orig.jpg
tags: [freedom, philosophy, idea]
---

Very common rhetoric which I have always heard from people around me is that **entrepreneurs** are free people. They have the freedom to make their own decisions, employ/fire people
of their choices, take a vacation in Ibiza while still earning money passively. Entrepreneurship leads to **freedom**, while a desk job is almost always **submissive** to your evil bosses
around. As usual, I haven’t fully accepted this. All this makes me think: 

> What is Control? What is freedom? Are we all really free?

**Control** is defined as the power to **influence people**. So does that mean entrepreneurs and people like them have no one to control them? 
**Are we really free?**
On our desk jobs, we have **managers** to report to, in universities we have **professors** and **mentors**, even the general public has to follow **government** orders
(we don’t live in a completely **libertarian society**). **So who is free?** Generally, people say, **business owners**, **successful entrepreneurs** are truly free. They control their own lives. 
But do they? At the end of the day, their products will be either chosen or thrown away by **free markets**. Even if their products are successful, they would have to keep tweaking or
at least maintain the same level of quality and excitement with the product. There are legit wonderful products thrown away by free markets, because of innumerable reasons 
including complicated design, utilisation or higher prices, etc. So are you really free? No, you’re definitely not. In fact, now you’re in the control of even larger **population** 
which has the power to either make you successful or destroy you. A corporate job might be controlled by maybe 2-3 managers directly and around 50 indirectly. You tell me what’s 
freer!

Also by the same logic, even the world’s **richest person** isn’t free because yet again he/she is controlled by the markets. World’s most powerful guy? Let’s say The President of the 
USA. Is he free? Heck no! Every move, every decision, every thought, every idea which he possesses has global influence. One wrong decision, or for that matter even correct 
decision but hated by general consensus would force you to be impeached.
Not the richest, not even the most powerful. So who is free?

## Consumerist Society 

It is high time we realise that **travelling** in business class, having the liberty to take vacations as and when you want to, buying high-end clothing is what the society including
these brands have **marketed** to all of us. And some of us do achieve this potential. However, this very definition of a life without control is very **consumerist** and has no 
foundation and logic. At the end of the day, we all are in control of **someone** or **something**.

Who isn’t? Maybe a **self-sufficient** farmer who depends on his crops for survival. He who depends on nature for all his requirements. Water from natural sources, filters
developed from nature itself, self-grown food crops one eliminates all possibilities of control from the picture. He is truly free.

So does that mean we all go back to our natural past? It would be **wonderful** to do so. Nature will get time to **heal** itself and **consumerism** will reduce. However, obviously not
everyone would be capable or interested in doing so. Even I am interested in travelling around the world, sometimes in luxuries. My point was not to switch completely to nature 
(even though it will be wonderful if this happens) but to make people aware that **no matter what**, they will never achieve **true freedom** as long as they are attached to the
**consumerist society.** 

> No one is free. We all are under someone’s/something’s control.




